Rewrite the intro to IOTA. (#565)
iota-community/iota-wiki: internal/learn/about-iota/tangle.md

---
id: tangle
title: The Tangle
description: The Tangle is the data structure behind IOTA and it is different from a blockchain.

> ---

Reviewer: this could do with an image

# The Tangle

> The Tangle is a structure that holds all necessary information to keep track of token ownership. It is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of messages, where each newer message is attached to two to eight older ones. The protocol can process these various attachments in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tangle is a structure that holds all necessary information to keep track of token ownership. It is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of messages, where each newer message is attached to two to eight older ones. The protocol can process these various attachments in parallel.
```

![An animation of a blockchain where new transactions have to pass through a narrow gap one by one.](/img/learn/blockchain-bottleneck.gif "Click to see the full-sized image.")

*The blockchain bottleneck.*

Transactions in a blockchain can only become part of the ledger if they are included in a newly issued block by the block producer (a miner in Proof of Work blockchains, a staker in Proof of Stake blockchains). In nearly all blockchains, the block producers can decide which new transactions they include in their blocks. They of course favor users willing to pay higher fees for their transactions. Any time there are more transactions that can pass through the blockchain bottleneck, the transaction fees ramp up.

There is more. In blockchains, each block producer works on a potential new block, but only a single producer will become the leader of the blockchain and get its block attached. All other potential blocks will be discarded — and in case of PoW systems, all effort and electricity put into computing them will be wasted. 

> Only the blockchain leader collects the reward for producing a block. Only the largest miners and stakers can collect this reward consistently. It promotes a system with fewer but bigger players, which can be perceived as a form of centralization.

Author: I'm not that sure about spiitting it into subsections. All topics are so interrelated and the section goes full circle by showing the tangle jarneck. I think the animations break up the text good enough for the weaker structure to suffice.

> Only the blockchain leader collects the reward for producing a block. Only the largest miners and stakers can collect this reward consistently. It promotes a system with fewer but bigger players, which can be perceived as a form of centralization.

Reviewer: I think the titles would help break up the text a bit, mainly for people who are skimming over the article.

---
id: tangle
title: The Tangle
description: The Tangle is the data structure behind IOTA and it is different from a blockchain.
image: /img/learn.svg
keywords:
- explanation
---

# The Tangle

> The Tangle is a structure that holds all necessary information to keep track of token ownership. It is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of messages, where each newer message is attached to two to eight older ones. The protocol can process these various attachments in parallel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Tangle is a structure that holds all necessary information to keep track of token ownership. It is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of blocks, where each newer block is attached to two to eight older ones. Every block contains only a single change to the ledger state. The protocol can process these various attachments in parallel.
```

> IOTA nodes reach consensus on the ledger state by validating massages. Anyone can send a message [for free](./why-is-iota-feeless.md). Currently, messages will only be considered valid if they reference a milestone. Milestones are issued by a special network node that is called [Coordinator](./coordinator.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IOTA nodes reach consensus on the ledger state by validating blocks. Anyone can send a block [for free](./why-is-iota-feeless.md). Currently, blocks will only be considered valid if they reference a milestone. Milestones are issued by a special network node that is called [Coordinator](./coordinator.md).
```

*The blockchain bottleneck.*

Transactions in a blockchain can only become part of the ledger if they are included in a newly issued block by the block producer (a miner in Proof of Work blockchains, a staker in Proof of Stake blockchains). In nearly all blockchains, the block producers can decide which new transactions they include in their blocks. They of course favor users willing to pay higher fees for their transactions. Any time there are more transactions that can pass through the blockchain bottleneck, the transaction fees ramp up.

There is more. In blockchains, each block producer works on a potential new block, but only a single producer will become the leader of the blockchain and get its block attached. All other potential blocks will be discarded — and in case of PoW systems, all effort and electricity put into computing them will be wasted. 

Only the blockchain leader collects the reward for producing a block. Only the largest miners and stakers can collect this reward consistently. It promotes a system with fewer but bigger players, which can be perceived as a form of centralization.

### The Tangle

> The Tangle is a network of parallel processed transactions. These parallel transactions form the "front" of the Tangle and offer multiple points for newly issued transactions to attach to. There are no block producers, and it is enough to issue your transaction to any node to imprint into the Tangle.

Reviewer 3: > There are no block producers, and it is enough to issue your transaction to any node to imprint into the Tangle.

Not sure if this is correct? Isn't the issuer it's own block producer (or message producer in Chrysalis terms)?

Also the use of "imprint" feels a bit confusing as a non-native speaker. Could we rephrase it to use previously used terminology like "attach to the Tangle" or something?

> IOTA is a leaderless protocol. Multiple nodes attach multiple transactions to multiple points of the Tangle at the same time. IOTA has no bottlenecks, no middlemen, and no fees.

Reviewer 3: This may be a more general comment, but: we seem to use "transaction" and "message" interchangeably in this text (and I think in others as well). To my understanding transactions are a type of payload which are added to a message and messages get attached to the Tangle (just like in blockchains transactions get added to a block and the block gets added to the chain).

We have messages with other payloads as well, like indexation messages. Wouldn't it be better to make this distinction early on to avoid confusion? Or at least be consistent in the use of those terms?
